# Annotating visual explanations of physical mechanisms

### Title
causaldraw_annotations

### Researchers 
Holly Huey, Caren Walker, and Judith Fan

### Description
Causal knowledge allows us to make predictions about future events and act upon objects in order to generate desired outcomes[1-2]. 
Huey, Fan, and Walker (2020) collected a dataset of 300 sketches to explore visual communication as a means to convey causal knowledge to others in a 
condensed, exportable format. This work capitalized on prior work that has examined how the spatial layout of elements in well-designed visualizations,
such as sketches, mirrors the placement and relations of elements in the physical world, making it easier to grasp the correspondence among elements in 
each domain[3-6]. Visualizations have also been shown to promote inference of abstract relations by leveraging a small set of relational symbols, such 
as lines and arrows[7-8]. 

In the original study, participants drew simple machines (gears, levers, and pulleys), which comprise a unique class of objects that can be rich in both visual appearance and causal information. They were prompted to generate visual explanations (e.g., of how a machine functions) or visual depictions (e.g., of what a machine looks like). While this original study explored how these prompts influenced drawing behavior by examining how factors such as ink usage, number of strokes, and drawing time differ between conditions, the study did not address the semantic differences that distinguish visual explanations from visual depictions (i.e., how prompts might have influenced which different elements participants drew). 

To measure these semantic differences, the current study will present a new group of participants (“annotators”) with the sketches generated by the original study. Annotators will label each stroke of a sketch to show how it corresponds to the drawn machines. By collecting annotations of the original dataset, the study specifically aims to explore how semantic characteristics such as ink usage devoted to causal or non-causal elements, number of drawn causal elements, number of symbols, and order by which elements are drawn differ between conditions. 

## Study Information
### Hypotheses
If  participants of the original study (Huey, Fan, and Walker, 2020) were more selective when producing informative visual explanations than when producing faithful visual depictions, we hypothesize that visual explanations will contain more causally relevant information than visual depictions. Specifically:

1. We predict that visual explanations will contain a greater proportion of strokes that are labeled as “causal” by annotators than visual depictions. 

2. We predict that a higher proportion of “ink” in visual explanations will be devoted to “causal” strokes than visual depictions, in which the amount of “ink” is measured by the arc length of the mark made between the depression of the mouse cursor (“pen down”) and the lifting of the mouse cursor (“pen up”).

3. We predict that visual explanations will contain a greater number of abstract “symbols” conveying non-visual properties of the machines (e.g., motion) than visual depictions. 

## Design Plan
### Study type 
Experiment - A researcher randomly assigns treatments to study subjects, this includes field or lab experiments. This is also known as an intervention experiment and includes randomized controlled trials

### Blinding
For studies that involve human subjects, they will not know the treatment group to which they have been assigned. 

### Is there any additional blinding in this study?
No response

### Study Plan
Annotators will label sketches on a custom web-based annotation platform. Before test trials, they will first be presented with a video demonstration of how to operate the machine that participants drew in the original. Each machine will consist of a unique spatial configuration of brightly colored mechanical elements, including gears, pulleys, and lever, that can be used to activate a light bulb. Half of these mechanical elements can be manipulated to activate the light (causal), whereas the other half of them cannot (non-causal). For each machine, these causal and non-causal elements will be equated in size, number, and type (gears, levers, and pulleys) to ensure that they are matched in perceptual salience. 

Machines will also vary by two levels of complexity and the demonstration order by which causal and non-causal elements  are manipulated, which follow either an “ABBA” or “BAAB” pattern. Thus, each annotator will be presented with 1 or 12 possible machines. 

Following each video demonstration, annotators will complete a comprehension check prior to test trials. During test trials, annotators will view a reference image of the machine on the left of the screen, menu of labels in the middle, and a sketch on the right. The reference image will be segmented into different colored regions and numbered by segmentation (e.g., a gear may be colored as blue and numbered as “1”). Labels in the menu will correspond to the color and number of the reference image. Each stroke of sketch will be highlighted one at a time, and annotators will label what each stroke corresponds to in the reference image. Annotators will complete 10 test trials and 1 catch trial that will be randomly inserted between trial 3 and 8. All 11 sketches of the test and catch trials will correspond to the same video demonstration and reference image. 

See Data Exclusion plan for more details about catch trials. 

## Sampling Plan
### Existing Data
Registration following analysis of the data: As of the date of submission, you have accessed and analyzed some of the data relevant to the research plan. This includes preliminary analysis of variables, calculation of descriptive statistics, and observation of data distributions. Please see cos.io/prereg for more information. 

### Data collection procedures
We plan to include 90 English-speaking adults. Participants will be recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) and will receive $4.00 for their participation in our ~20 minute study (approx. $12/hr). 

### Sample size
We plan to include 90 English-speaking adults who did not participate in the original study.

### Sample size rationale
The original dataset included 300 sketches. Each sketch will receive annotations from 3 annotators of the present study, and each annotator will annotate 10 sketches. Therefore, we will include 90 annotators in our study. 

### Stopping rule
Data collection will stop when 90 annotators have successfully completed the study.

### Variables
Measured variables
We will analyze the effect of condition on three outcome variables: the number of strokes labeled as “causal”, amount of “ink” devoted to “causal” strokes, number of strokes labeled as “symbols”, and drawing order of strokes. 

## Analysis Plan
### Statistical Models
Below are how we plan to specify each measured variable corresponding to the statistical model: 

1. Number of strokes labeled as “causal”
glmer(causal ~ condition + (1 + condition | orig_gameID) + (1 | sketchID) + (1 | toy_type) , family="binomial", data = data)

2. Amount of “ink” (i.e., arc length of strokes)
lmer(logLength ~ condition * causal + (1 + condition | orig_gameID) + (1 | toy_type), data = arc)

3. Number of strokes labeled as “symbols”
lmer(sum ~ condition + (1 | orig_gameID) + (1 | toy_type), data = sym)

## Data exclusion
Sessions will be excluded from analysis based on the below exclusion criteria: 

1) Invalid annotations: Annotators will complete 1 “catch trial” that will be randomly inserted between trial 3 and 8 of the test trials. This catch trial will be annotated by a researcher as a ground truth comparison. If annotators make 3 or more errors when labelling strokes, all data from that session will be excluded from subsequent analysis. 

2) Technical failure: Annotators will complete an exit survey at the end of the experiment. If annotators report that any of the videos did not display properly (e.g., videos freeze intermittently or do not load) or if the drawing interface did not function properly on a trial (e.g., cursor could not draw), all data from that session will be excluded from subsequent analysis.

3) Missing data: If a session is missing 2 of the 10 test trials or missing the catch trial, all data from that session will be excluded from subsequent analysis. 

4) Failure to follow task instructions: Upon labeling each stroke, we will record responseLatency, which is defined as the amount of time between when a stroke is highlighted and when the annotator labels it. To ensure that annotators are making thoughtful decisions and not merely clicking through the task, all data from a session will be excluded from subsequent analysis if the average responseLatency of all the strokes within a trial is less than 0.5 seconds.  

## Other
### Other
References
<br>
[1] Sloman, S. (2005). Causal models: how people think about the world and its alternatives. Oxford University Press.
<br>
[2] Meltzoff, A. (2007). Infants’ Causal Learning. Causal learning: psychology, philosophy, and computation, 37-47. Oxford University Press.
<br>
[3] Tversky, B., Agrawala, M., Heiser, J., Lee, P., Hanrahan, P., Phan, D., & Daniel, M. P. (2006). Cognitive design principles for automated generation of visualizations. In Allen G, editor. Applied Spatial Cognition: From Research to Cognitive Technology, 53-75. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
<br>
[4] Larkin, J., & Simon, H. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 11, 65–100.
<br>
[5] Tversky, B., & Bobek, E. (2016). Creating visual explanations improves learning. Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications, 1(1), 27.
<br>
[6] Tversky, B., & Morrison, J. B. (2002). Animation: can it facilitate? International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.
<br>
[7] Tversky, B., & Heiser, J., (2006). Arrows in comprehending and producing mechanical diagrams. Cognitive Science, 30, 581-592. 
<br>
[8] Tversky, B., Zacks, J., Lee, P., & Heiser, J. (2000). Lines, blobs, crosses and arrows: Diagrammatic communication with schematic figures. In International conference on theory and application of diagrams, 221-230. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

